All right, good morning. Welcome to the
experience section of statistical
rethinking for 2026. Um, this is lecture
B1. The B is for the experience section.
B stands for experienced.
Uh, why am I doing the the course this
way this year? Um, I've split the course
into two sections. Uh, the beginner
section, section A, and the experience
section, section B. Because in previous
years, I feel like the courses move too
fast.
uh for a lot of students, for the
beginning students, it moves too quickly
uh because we're doing sometimes two
chapters a week in the beginning and it
moves very quickly uh for for the
beginners. Um so now the first half of
the book in the beginner section will be
done in 10 weeks at half the speed that
I think that probably will be better for
my learning goals for the be for the
beginner section. Um and then in the
second half of the course in previous
years I think people fell behind.
Uh it's just it gets very complicated.
Uh rightly so because the goal of this
course is to train you to really do this
stuff. Right? This is a practical
course. It's not a theory stats course.
Um and as we get into realistic data
analyses, they're necessarily more
complex. And I want to show you that
complexity and give you the workflows
and real working code examples and all
of that. Um, so we just need more time I
think in the second half. And so here in
the experience section, we're going to
do the second half of the book again at
half speed. Um, so the idea is all of
you have had the first half already or
you're brave, one of the two. And I
don't care which, honestly. Um, you can
take the um you can do both sections.
Uh, I do section A on Tuesdays and
section B on Fridays. And you're welcome
to join both. That'll be a confusing
experience for you, but maybe not.
Right. People tell me I I know people
who've taken this course five times and
they say every time they learn something
new. That's probably because the course
is constantly changing. Yeah, that's I
do that to keep it exciting for myself.
Um, in any event, this is uh this is the
reason I have split it like this and so
I extend a warm welcome to you to the
experience section. Um just some course
practical matters. Uh I'm going to keep
everything on this GitHub repository.
Currently there's a registration link
there um that I'd like you to use if you
want to be on the mailing list and that
means I'll be able to send out things
like link to the PDF of the book and a
link for homework submissions and things
like that. But you can always just um
since you're physically here, you can
always get those things from me another
way if you don't. But it's just
convenient if you're on that list. So
just go do it once. Um, and uh I'll take
down the registration link sometime next
week. Um, okay.
I'm actually
kind of excited to start a basian course
at multi-level models. Uh, so the
beginner section ends at multi-level
models and this section starts at
multi-level models and I'm teaching them
both at the same time. And uh I like the
beginner section because it's exciting
to teach foundations to naive minds
ready to be infected with the virus of
bays. And then the experience section I
get to start with the part where bays
really pays.
I often feel like in the beginner
section there's a lot of extra fuss to
do a simple analysis in bay that is
going to give you exactly the same
results as you know some simple t test.
And that's true but I'm trying to teach
the foundations. But when we get into
realistic data analysis problems, we
need the additional power and
flexibility that uh is taught in the
beginning section. So it's nice in this
section, we're going to start already at
a place where it really makes a
difference and we really see the
advantage of the basian framework. Uh
the metaphor here in these slides is
when we do simple data analysis like
analyzing a randomized experiment, some
perfectly balanced randomized
experiment, it's like cutting a birthday
cake with a chainsaw, right? It's just
like the basian t test has a bunch of
extra moving parts and they do nothing,
right? I'm exaggerating a bit. I would
still do the basian t test myself, but
uh but it is kind of like cutting the
birthday cake with a chainsaw. It works,
but it's extra power, right? Um but uh
trying to fit multi-level models without
bays is like trying to cut down a tree
with a pocketk knife. You can do it, but
it's the wrong way to do it. Yeah, it's
worse in every way. Uh, and so I'm going
to give you an introduction to
multi-level models today. Um, and it's
not going to be focused on this
comparison between the basian and
non-basian methods. Um, but that's what
is in the background here in the history
of these approaches is that there's a
sense in which the ba multi-level models
are extremely natural in the basian
approach because the basian approach has
no problem with hierarchical levels of
uncertainty and what to do with them.
There's an automatic procedure that does
not have to be discovered or invented
for dealing with hierarchical
uncertainty.
In non-basian approaches, there is no
approach to hierarchical uncertainty. Uh
and and the uncertainty of latent
parameters in non-basian approaches, the
so-called empirical bay approach is just
to fix them at single values to discard
the uncertainty of the hierarchical
parameters. Um so if you've ever heard
this method called empirical bays,
that's what LME4, the package LME4 does.
It's the variance components are fixed
at single values. Uh in our approach, we
won't do that. We have full posterior
uncertainty and we integrate over it
because that's the only thing you can
do. Yeah. Um
so uh this is the general program. Uh we
we get to start at a place where it
really matters. In simple analyses, it
makes little difference. But with
realistic analyses with multiple levels
of uncertainty, that would include
things like measurement error, missing
data, latent variables. And today we're
going to talk a lot about regularization
and how it emerges naturally from the
generative model of a hierarchical data
set. Um uh oh yeah the final thing on
this slide I wanted to talk about uh it
is it has not escaped my notice uh that
lots of people are using basian
algorithms now because it's the only way
to fit their multi-level models
reliably. So there's this wonderful
package BRMS.
Yeah, it's written by Powell Bner. Uh
and uh it's a great package. Everyone's
using it now because they can't get the
models they want to fit in LME4. So they
use BRMS instead. BRMS will do lots of
other things as well. Um, but people
don't have a basian education, but
they're running basian algorithms. So
now, as a a philosophical basian, this
isn't the way I wanted to win, but I'll
take it, right? It's just sort of like,
okay, everybody's basian just because
it's the only way to get their models to
fit. It feels like a dirty victory.
Yeah. [laughter]
But I'm okay. It's like, I'll I'll take
what I can get here. Um, I want to give
you some kind of education in this
course about why that's true. and why
the multi-level models are much more
natural and tractable.
Um, it's because they're big trees and
you need the chainsaw is is the
metaphorical version of this. A little
bit of history if if you'll excuse the
digression. Um, in the middle of the
20th century, there was this landmark
paper in in statistics, uh, that no one
outside of statistics, I think, has
heard of, uh, by James Stein in 1956
with this wonderful poetic title that
only a statistician could write, inad
inadmissibility of the usual estimator
for the mean of a multivariable normal
distribution. Yes. Okay. So, you know
what this paper's about? No. So, this
was a big deal paper. Uh, it surprised a
lot of people. What he shows in this
paper from a purely frequentist
perspective is that normal maximum
likelihood estimates are in statistical
jargon inadmissible meaning they are
always inferior
to some kind of pulled quasi basian
estimator and this was a frequentist
proof. So this was a big deal in
statistics and from here lots of really
great research was catapulted forward.
uh the kinds of estimators that are
developed in this paper are extremely
natural and automatic in a basian
multi-level model. uh but the advantages
of them there are non-basian proofs and
that this was a big deal in in the 20th
century and this is one of the reasons I
keep saying the stats wars are over
because frequentist proved that basian
estimators are better and this is part
of that tradition right so statisticians
my age don't fight about these things
anymore you use whatever estimator you
want and then you evaluate it using
whatever criteria you want but the the
boomer so to speak stat wars of the
early 20th century are
Yeah. And papers like this are an
important part of that. So
um okay, let's roll forward to
multi-level models. In this course, I'm
going to spend a lot of time coming back
to slides that look like this. uh in the
different data analysis examples, I want
to take a workflow perspective so that
we can keep track of where in the
overall logical structure of our project
we are and what choices we need to make
in that in that uh part of the of the
workflow and what consequences they can
have. So uh this is the basic workflow
diagram I what I call the core basian
workflow where we combine some
generative model of the scientific
system we're studying uh with a specific
question or set of questions called
estims to um deduce some statistical
model an estimator a way to extract
evidence from data and then we can
combine um that estimator with data to
get some estimate and then we're going
to post-process those estimates and do
specific things with them depending upon
our questions.
Um, this is going to be elaborated. This
is the core skeleton here, but this will
be elaborated in a lot of the examples
with things like prior model checks and
posterior model checks, right? Because
I'm all about reliability. So, we we
test things. We test our models before
we run them on real data. We test them
after we run them on real data because
the universe is out to get you. Yeah.
And so, we check, right? If you don't
test, you miss everything. And so we're
going to test things. Um, but we could
add more. Uh, usually the posterior
distribution is not what we want. What
we want is some function of the
posterior distribution, meaning some set
of marginal effects, which are
predictions or causal effects that we we
um calculate for some target population.
Uh, or we do post stratification
um where we we transport our estimates
to some other something other than the
sample, right? right? We kind of lift it
to a population with so new data comes
in in postratification. So it's a it's a
secondary statistical step and then
things like sensitivity analysis.
Uh, and then
really since I think of this as a
practical course, the real target is
something like this and you excuse the
monstrosity of this slide, but this is
what your projects are like, right? I
mean, let's let's be honest. Uh, the I
teach the core workflow because we need
some logical scaffold to build up to and
we can teach the principles there. But
in real data analysis, you've got
multiple generative models, you've got
several kinds of estims, you you fit a
wide range of models. I only say four
here, but I mean how many models did you
fit in your last statistical analysis,
right? Just think about it. Dozens
probably. Yeah. Some of those models are
fit just because there are scaffolds to
in excuse me, engineer the model you
want
and others are built because you want to
compare them and understand the
sensitivity of the models. There are
lots of reasons to fit multiple models
and they're not cheating. Yeah, we do it
legitimately. Um, we have multiple data
sets. uh we have problems in our data
sets. So we have to test our data,
right? The data cannot be trusted. Yeah.
No more than the models can. We end up
with dozens of estimates. We want to
compare and post-process these
estimates. Um this is just reality.
Yeah. You've already done this. What you
haven't had uh probably because I never
had it when I was at your stage is any
kind of scientific training in dealing
with this kind of workflow. And so I
want to build up to this. But different
examples will focus on different parts
of this kind of realistic workflow. Um
uh and we'll push other parts of it into
the shadows. But in your own work, of
course, all of this is there and we need
to manage the complexity and do some
quality uh assurance.
Okay,
we'll be simpler today. I'll focus on
the core workflow of multi-level models
and try to give uh some basic
understanding of of their structure.
uh and what they're useful for. Um I
believe that multi-level models are a
really natural default kind of
regression model. Uh usually their
advantages are appropriate and useful in
a wide range of data sets. And that's
because data contain hierarchical units
nearly always. There's nearly always
some structure. Even if even if you're
doing experiments, you have blocks,
right?
You have treatments in blocks. So you
have hierarchical structure already. Um
uh in in observational data sets there's
tons of hierarchical structure you have
no control over. Yeah. So this is just a
normal part of what we do. Um causal
models uh contain hierarchical effects
as well u because the the treatments can
apply at different units. There can be
spillovers. There's all kinds of reasons
to be concerned with hierarchy. Um, and
when we generalize our predictions,
there's a natural hierarchical structure
because now we're embedding samples in a
meta population, right? When we do
predictions, we're transferring to the
future or we want to predict for units
that weren't in the data or anything of
that kind. Um, the term multi-level is
not well defined, but it applies to all
of these things. So, we're going to have
to be very careful, but I have a
strategy for trying to manage that
terminological complexity.
Um, why fit multi-level models? Here are
kind of the main four reasons I think
just from a practical scientific
perspective. Um and each of these four
reasons uh will have an effect on the
exact model structure we use. So I want
to teach it from that perspective.
There's not one kind of enshrined
multi-level model structure that's right
for all things. If you can state your
question very clearly and sketch out the
generative model of your scientific
system, you can often simplify the
analysis. You don't need the full
complexity. Uh the first reason which
we'll spend basically all of the lecture
on is regularized estimates. That is um
reducing overfitting. This is a a major
uh advantage of multi-level models is
that they have a kind of automatic
regularization feature where they learn
the proper amount of regularization from
the data itself. And I'm going to give
you a review of that. Um if you've
forgotten about the curse of overfitting
and such uh it'll come back to you as we
get into this. Um the second reason is
more efficient estimates as well.
Multi-level models make more better use
of the total sample. Uh this happens at
the same time as number one but they're
different ways to view the same
advantage. Um uh the third is estimation
of variance components itself. Sometimes
your question is how is variance
structured in the population or in the
sample. It's nice to have an estimate
for that rather than it being some post
estimation procedure for variance
estimation. So in multi-level models we
have parameters for variance components
and we can get posterior distributions
for them just like anything else. Um and
then finally uh they are useful for
removing certain kinds of confounding.
Um I'm not going to have time to go into
this today. it needs to be its own
lecture but there's something I call
group level confounding which I I have a
slide for at the very end of this
lecture I hope to get to just to wet
your appetite for it but it's a complex
topic okay back to the core basing
workflow um to make choices between
those four things and different model
forms they come from you really need to
focus on the est demand is asked like
why what are you really hoping to get
out of this machinery um is it uh
regularization is it unit level
estimate, is it variance components? If
you can state that more clearly, you can
make more informed choices um about
exactly what you're doing and and which
kinds of checks you need to worry about.
Um the other thing about multi-level
models which requires is kind of a
branching point in your workflow are
what you do with the estimates at the
end in terms of generating predictions.
As soon as you have multiple levels in
the model and in the data, you can make
predictions at different levels. And
then you need to make choices like do I
want my predictions for the same units,
the same clusters in the sample or for
new ones? Right? So say you were doing
an educational study um and the clusters
are classrooms. Do you want predictions
for new classrooms or the same
classrooms? Those are different
procedures, different things you do with
the same posterior distribution. Yeah.
that those choices arise automatically
in hierarchical data sets where they
don't arise automatically in flat is
flat the opposite of hierarchical in
flat data sets I'm not sure we need a
term there
okay what is regularization u so
statistical models tend to overfitit the
data which means they tend to uh learn
too much about the sample they they they
tend to learn the irregular features of
a sample. Uh irregular means there are
features of the sample which will not be
seen in future samples from the same
process.
Regular features of the sample are the
ones we're usually targeting. Those are
the ones that help us make good
predictions. Whether those predictions
are simply um uh forecasts or whether
they're predictions of the consequences
of an intervention. That would be a
causal effect in in many people's
language. Uh but in all these cases
we're we're aiming for regularized
predictions. Um and multi-level models
have a natural way to adaptively
regularize. You can do regularization
just by rigging it in your statistical
model using priors for example. There
are other methods as well. But if you
use informative priors, you get
regularization. And that's that's not
cheating. It's one of the nice things
about prior. Multi-level models also use
prior to get regularizations, but the
priors are learned from the sample.
Um, and I'll show you how that works uh
as we go. Um, so the I'm going to use
some some terminology here probably
unconsciously and automatically. So I
put it on this slide. So I'm I reminded
myself to define it. Um, often in the
multi-level modeling literature we talk
about pooling. Um, pooling is a
procedure. Regularization is the
consequence. Yeah, I'll say it again.
Pooling is a procedure. Regularization
is a consequence. And there are these
pooling is a continuous thing. And you
can do a lot of pooling or very little
pooling. But I'm going to break it into
three categories just for the conceptual
uh understanding of it. First, there's
complete pooling. Um this is when we
ignore the clusters in the data. We
ignore the hierarchical structure and we
just estimate a grand mean for something
or one slope for every one average slope
for all the units in the data. That's
called complete pooling, right? We pull
all the data to estimate a parameter.
Um, no pooling is when each clusters has
its own parameters, has its own
estimates, but those estimates only come
from the data in that cluster, which
might sound rational to you right now,
but I want to convince you it's not.
Yeah, you can get better estimates of
cluster level properties by using
[clears throat] the whole sample. Uh,
and that's what partial pooling does.
Partial pooling uses both the weights uh
in different ways the data in each
cluster and the whole sample to get a
regularized estimate of the cluster
level effects.
And I'll show you this in slow motion in
in the next half hour as we go through
this. Oh, this um duck rabbit thing.
Sorry. This is the original duck rabbit.
It's the oldest one I could find online.
Uh it's in German so it must be old.
Yeah. In that tight face, right?
[laughter] That no one can read anymore.
Um so the point being multi-level models
um have this kind of dual nature which
which or multiple properties which arise
from this their structure and you can
view them as a rabbit or a duck so to
speak depending upon what you're
interested in. So the regularization
feature of them emerges from the
hierarchy. uh but the hierarchy is there
just because that's the generative model
of the population right so you can see
them as just being an expression of the
generative structure the struct the
scientific structure of the population
you're trying to study or you can see
them as a machine for regularization and
there that's equivalent you get the same
consequence and the same statistical
model out of it there's no disagreement
there that's what I wanted to emphasize
with the rabbit duck thing I don't know
if that metaphor works for you but
there's no conflict there if someone
says I just want regularization and
someone else is like, well, I'm modeling
the scientific structure. I really care
about the variance. It's the same model.
Yeah, there's no disagreement at all.
One wants the rabbit, one wants the
duck. It's the same drawing. Okay.
Um that sort of thing I think happens a
lot in in machine learning. Okay, for
the rest of this lecture, I'm going to
use this um simple hierarchical data set
that's in the book. It's in this is in
the first multi-level modeling chapter
in the book. I think it's chapter 12.
Um, and am I right? I can't remember. I
only wrote the book. It's been a while.
Uh, this called read frogs um data set.
This is an experimental data set. Uh,
using readfrog tadpoles, right? What's a
tadpole? A tadpole is a juvenile frog.
Yeah, I know you guys know this, but
it's nice to say it, right? Um, and many
frog species spend most of their life as
a tadpole. Then they're briefly a frog,
have some fun, and die. Yeah. and or not
or not have some fun as the case may be.
Um in this particular data set uh this
is from this this paper 2005 paper by
Vones and Bulkar they have experimental
um aquariums I think I'm going to call
them tanks of tadpole 48 groups and they
have randomized treatments of the
density that is how many tadpoles are in
each the size of the tadpoles big or
small and whether there are predators
present these predators are something
like danelfly larvae or dragonfly larvae
I forget which which are aquatic
monsters. They're they're just
terrifying the tadpoles and um insects
eating amphibians. Happens all the time.
Yeah. Uh so this is an experimental data
set. So we don't have to worry about
confounding, right? Which is not like
your life. [laughter] I know it's not
like my life either, but it's nice for
teaching. Yeah. And then we're going to
bring we're going to loop confounding
back in in a future lecture because it's
always there. But it's nice to keep this
out. We're focusing on survival. how
many tadpoles survive to some fixed
duration. Lots of tadpoles die. There's
only a certain amount of uh of food in
the aquarium. There's competition. They
fight one another. They fight with
predators. Uh so it's a uh this is an
ecological study about how these little
communities of tadpoles work.
Uh so
here's the non-generative model of the
system on the right, a DAG, a directed
as cyclic graph. Um to remind you uh
since you're since you're not doing the
beginner part and you may have forgotten
a while, these DAGs only express
structural relationships, but it's not a
generative model of the system because
it's completely nonparametric. There's
no distributional assumptions or
assumptions about functional forms or
any of those things. It's it's something
you use to build a generative model but
you can do a lot of analysis with them.
So I use them constantly uh in these but
usually we go beyond this and then
structure a generative model that's
based upon the DAG. This will come back
to you. Um so in this case I want to
introduce some notation. We've got the
outcome variable of interest in the
middle of the swarm of arrows there
which is survival. And I have a
subscript I now in this to indicate that
survival is an individual tadpole
feature. Right? We know for individual
tadpoles whether they live or die. But
all the other variables here are group
level.
Right? The the tank is just an index.
It's which tank you're in. Um then
density is the initial number of
tadpoles.
Uh size is the size of the tadpoles. And
predators is the presence and absence of
those. So all of those experimental
variables apply to all the tadpoles in
each tank, but tadpoles have individual
outcomes. Right? Now surely there are
things about individual tadpoles that
could be measured, but we don't have
those data. Yeah, that this is going to
be important when we think about
confounding later and but this is a
feature of hierarchical data sets is
you'll have some variables which apply
to whole units and some variables which
apply to individuals inside those units
and that's the hierarchical nature of
it. Is this clear? So, I'm going to put
these little sub eyes on DAGs when it's
individual level and try to leave
subscripts off when it's a group level.
I think eventually we're going to have
like a three-level data set at some
point and then we're going to need more
subscripts. And I just want to apologize
for that already because it's terrible
this this the cursive notation to deal
with that. But I'll I'll try to move
slowly through those things when we get
there. It's just how it goes. Um I mean,
you could add time, right? If you have a
time series, you've already got another
subscript and it just it all it all goes
to hell real fast. Yeah. Um, okay. I
want to
um say a little bit about what tank
means here. Tank is just an index. It's
just like a location of where the where
the tadpole was. Uh but the idea here is
that it's a proxy for unmeasured things
that all the tadpoles that share that
index have experienced.
Right? So each aquarium will have
unmeasured properties which affect the
survival of all the tadpoles in it. But
we don't know what they are.
If if the point of the study was to
figure that out, then we could do things
like measure algae content or whatever
it is. I don't know. I'm not a tadpole
biologist. But uh if you've ever kept
aquarium fish, you know they
spontaneously die for no apparent
reason, right? It's very sad. And uh so
I imagine the same is true of tadpoles
in aquarium. Um so it's like a proxy,
right? And we're going to use it and the
repeat observations in each tank to
estimate those unmeasured features,
which seems like cheating, but you can
do it because you have multiple
measurements. You have multiple
tadpoles. And so you can get an average
survival independent of the other
predictors that we know about. Yeah. And
this is true a lot of times, right? So
again, I used the education example
before. If we were studying student
outcomes in classrooms, they're going to
be features of the classroom, lots of
them, which are hard to measure or even
to theorize about which affect commonly
student outcomes in there. They could be
features of the teacher. They could be
features of some of the students that
affect all the other students. They
could be the air conditioning, the CO2
levels in the classroom. There's lots of
stuff, right? This is what observational
work is like is there's tons of things.
It's even hard to list them all that
could affect outcomes within units. So,
it's nice to have a statistical way to
try to average those out and estimate
them. Uh, and this is the idea. Okay,
back to our core basian workflow. Um
we're going to start here uh uh thinking
about what our estimates are very
carefully so that we can keep that in
mind as we go through the example. Um
first we're estimated in estimating the
survival rate in each tank. So we're
interested in those unmeasured things.
Um uh ignoring the experimental
treatments for the moment. We just want
the best estimates possible of the
differences in survival in each tank.
And what I want to convince you is that
the best way to do that is to use
partial pooling, right? Not to use no
pooling, not to use all pooling, but
something in between. Uh and then the
second estimate
effects and that's a different model
because now you start putting in the
treatment variables. Yeah. uh and we
want to interpret that differently and
then think about what the use of partial
pooling is in causal estimation of the
experiment there. But that's something
I'll get to at the end if I have time.
Okay, this is what the data look like. I
I like this data set for teaching
because it's small. Uh there's 48 tanks.
Each one you've got tadpoles in and
tadpoles out basically. And then there's
features of it. Um the whole data set
fits on one little screen. It's just 48
rows. There's a count of tadpoles
surviving, a count of tadpoles that went
into the tank. Nice little data set, but
lots of complex statistical structure.
What I've done on this graph is just
order the tanks from 1 to 48 along the
horizontal. They come in three groups.
Low density, mid density, high density,
low density, I think, is 10 tadpoles.
Mid density is 20 or 25, and high
density is 35 tadpoles. Um, and then for
each tank, I've just plotted the
proportion of tadpoles that survived.
Those are the black dots on here. And
then that horizontal dash line is just
the average proportion across all the
tanks. Um, this is the most naive sort
of statistical model. I didn't even use
statistics to do it. I just averaged. I
just calculated the proportion in each
tank and plotted it. That's fine, right?
You can get something with that. We need
uncertainty still, but it's there. I
want to focus on is there's already some
issues in using these points as
estimates. Um
uh this is the no pooling model by the
way, right? Because we're only using the
data in each tank to make an estimate
about the survival rate in each tank. Um
so uh uh you can think about this kind
of of model, the no pooling model as a
simple logistic regression. We have or
binomial regression. In this case, the
the outcome variable s subi these are
counts from zero to the density, right?
the number of tadpoles you start with.
So we they're binomially distributed um
with number of trials D and then for the
survival I'm just estimating a parameter
alpha for each tank and I've just given
them all the same standard logistic
regression intercept prior that I use.
Um, if you've forgotten uh where does
this prior come from this normal 01.5,
there's a whole thing in the logistic
regression chapter where I do prior
predictive simulation to talk about why
I use this and it has to do with the
fact that uh on the lowjit scale um
really really wide prior when you
transform the probability scale they
pile up all the prior probability on
zero and one right because the tails are
long then you're just piling them up on
zero and one And we don't want that. We
want something that's flat on the
probability scale. And that means having
something that's narrow on the loaded
scale. Uh if you've forgotten about
that, go look at the logistic regression
chapter. Um I think it's called God
spike the integers or something like
that is the name of the chapter. Okay.
Um I want to focus on these three tanks
over here in the upper left. Um these
are terrible estimates. Now all the
tadpoles survived in these tanks. But do
we believe that that will always happen?
Right. No, we don't. We absolutely
don't. Right. These are not magic tanks
in which all tadpoles survive. These
tadpoles got lucky. Yeah, it can happen.
And uh as a statistical estimate, these
are problematic because the empirically
observed rate of survival is one. But
the rational uh prediction for that is
not one. Right? Just think of again use
your innate priors for this. Uh so the
job of statistics here is to get us away
from these point estimates and there are
lots of ways we could do that and what I
want to show you is the multi-level
model has a very natural way of
producing a better estimate than that.
Um okay so back to our workflow the next
thing we need to do in order to generate
the statistical model is have some
generative model. And in this case for
multi-level models what we do is we um
we describe the population. We say
there's a population of tanks and there
are unmeasured features of those tanks
which affect survivor survivorship and
those features have a distribution. So
we want to learn that distribution
and then we express that statistically
and all the rest emerges naturally from
it. So what do I mean? It has a
distribution. Um here's the modified
model the multi-level model. uh we again
we have a binomial distribution for the
survival counts.
Each tank just has a single intercept
that's specific to it. But now these
tank intercepts the the alpha j line
there in red uh is is a a prior but it's
a prior that depends upon other
parameters.
Um right now alpha bar which is the
average survivorship in the population
of tanks. Remember this is the
generative model. When we make a tank,
we are sampling it from the population
of possible tanks, right? There's kind
of like a worst possible tank in the
world and a best possible tank in the
world, but most tanks are in between. So
there's a distribution, and you imagine
when you make a tank, you've sampled
from that population. Um, so that's what
this expresses. And there's going to be
some average. Uh, and then there's going
to be some standard deviation. And I
have a question mark there because this
is this is where what I want to
problematize is what should we choose?
And what we're going to end up doing is
just making a parameter there and
learning it from the data. But I want to
start by saying what if we just plug in
numbers there. What happens? Right? So
we're going to start just by fixing by
putting in real numbers for the standard
deviation and see what happens to the
estimates. And then I'll put a parameter
there and we'll learn it from the data
and I'll show you that it learns a very
special value uh that we'd seen before.
Okay? This is this is a terrible way to
do drama because I've given you the
conclusion already, right? Spoilers.
It's just the way my class works. I give
you all the spoilers up front and then
you have to sit through the boring plot.
I apologize, but it's always going to be
that way with me. Um, okay. So this
slide just so you can compare the two
and understand the top is the no pooling
model standard logistic regression and
then the bottom right is the multi-level
model uh with that mysterious question
mark there. Are we good to move on? Does
this make sense so far? Um
I never want to rush through. All these
lectures are structured so I can go as
slow and stop any place and then pick up
the next time. Okay, so this needs some
explaining. This is a crazy slide. I
apologize. Uh but I spent hours on it so
you're going to sit through it. All
right. So um what's going on is uh at
the top. So what I'm doing is I'm fixing
the sigma here. So this alpha j normal
alpha bar sigma is the prior for our
tank level effects the tank intercepts
the the the loget of the log odd
survival rates in each tank. Um and for
the moment I fix sigma at 0.1 very small
and then run the model.
And at the very top there um the black
points are the naive empirical
proportions of survival in each tank
just as before. And the red points and
the sort of pink confidence areas are
the posterior distributions for each.
This is for sigma 0.1. Now I'm going to
advance this to other values of sigma
and you'll see that all those red points
spread. They're all stuck around the
mean right now because when you say
sigma is tiny, it's a strong prior
expectation that the tanks are all the
same.
So that this does the full pooling
model, right? It's like taking all the
data, treating all the tanks as the
same. The prior says all the tanks are
the same. Their sigma is only 0.1. So
now all of the data from all the tanks
is pulled to estimate a single mean and
the prediction for every tank is
basically that. So all the red points
are on the line for the average. Does
that make sense? Um, and the the bottom
is the density there for all the tanks.
And you can see they're all piled up on
a single spike somewhere, which is the
average survival across all tanks. Now
I'm going to advance this and it will be
more interesting. Okay. So now I've
swept across all the values of sigma up
to five. Yeah. Did you see that? Should
I do it again? Can we do it again here?
It's very fun. Yes.
So you believe the amount of things I
had to learn to make that. So um uh
now we're at the opposite extreme.
Sigma is five. It's very big. This is
like saying the tanks are really
different from one another. Uh you know
five on the log odd scale is essentially
everything, right? This is an incredibly
wide normal distribution on the log odd
scale. And now you'll see that the red
points have really spread apart um and
they've gone to the black points. Right.
You'll see that they overlay the black
points almost everywhere. Yeah. Uh even
those really extreme tanks the in the
upper left that where everyone survived
the red points have just gone to them.
So this is taken us to the no pooling
model. So you can interpret the complete
pooling model as setting sigma to a tiny
value letting it go to zero. We can't
actually make it zero in my code. But if
you take the limit as it goes to zero,
you get exactly to the no pooling model.
Um, and then you can let let it go to
infinity and then you get the um I mean
you get the complete pooling model if
you make it small and if you let it go
to infinity you get the no pooling model
which is what we see here. Does this
make sense? We've gotten something extra
here because now we have uncertainties,
right? And you can see that the
uncertainties are bigger on the left
when the tanks are smaller and it's
smaller on the right where the there's
more data. Yeah, the units on the right
have more data so the the uncertainty
intervals are smaller. It's all good.
doesn't mean the model's right, but it's
a nice heristic check. Yeah. Is this
good? Does this make sense? Um, we're
not done with this kind of figure,
though. So, uh, now we're going to, um,
hang on. I was going to animate it back
and forth so you can see what's going.
Yeah, this is what I wanted to do. Yeah.
So, you can just sort of get a sense of
it now. This is no pooling. This is
complete pooling.
No pooling.
and complete pooling. U so what should
we choose? There's a continuum of
choices, infinite number of sigas we
could choose in there. What's the right
one? Uh I don't think there's a right
one, but there is one that is going to
give you the best predictive performance
in this system, the best cross
validation performance. So let's think
about it that way. Imagine we did cross
validation on this. We don't have to
imagine. We're actually going to do it.
So what what's cross validation? We
leave out data. We fit the model and
then we we use the parameter estimates
to predict the left out cases. So we can
leave out a tank and fit the data to all
the other tanks and then predict the
left out tank what its survival will be
and do this over and over and over again
uh for each tank right leave one tank
out fit the data predict that tank put
that tank back in take another tank out
right this is cross validation
um and I have done this for you for a
bunch of values of sigma so the idea is
we take a value of sigma we do the cross
validation exercise and then we score
the model on how well it does only on
the left out data. Not its fit to
sample, but only its fit to what was
left out. And that's what this graph at
the bottom is going to be. The vertical
axis, so the horizontal axis are the
sigas. And I'm going to sweep across
these from left to right. And the
vertical axis is this thing, the PSIS
score. PSIS, remember this is from the
first half of the course. Paro smoothed
importance sampling. Uh this is a
computationally efficient way to do
leave oneout cross validation. Okay. Uh,
and so we're going to start here. I've
only done 0.1. 0.1 is up there with some
arbitrarily large number. Remember,
smaller values are better on on the
PSIS, right? Because it's a devian
measure. So, you want it to be small.
Um, and as we make sigma bigger, it gets
smaller. It gets smaller up until some
point and then it slowly starts to go
back up again. Do you see it? It's very
subtle.
Yeah. I like I like the expressions of
thoughtful expressions on everybody's
faces. It's I appreciate the audience
participation there. It's nice. And uh
but you can kind of see it, right? It's
the minimum's around uh 1.8.
Yeah. Or 1.79 on on the axis here.
That's and then it gradually goes back
up again. This is a very typical kind of
shape when you make cross validation
plots.
Um and so a sigma around 1.8 8 gives you
the best cross validation scores.
Yeah, for this particular data set. Not
in all cases. Yeah, it'll be different
for different data sets. Yeah, but for
this one, uh this is where it is. Um uh
I think in this slide, I just take it
right there. Yes, because we wanted to
look at the top chart. Now, when you
look at So, this is the so-called
optimal sigma from a cross validation
perspective. And now we look at the
estimates up top. And I want you to see
in particular for those um lucky
tadpoles in the upper left where they
all survived where the estimates are and
they're not on the data anymore,
right? They are shrunk towards the mean
because we're doing partial pooling.
Partial pooling is a compromise between
the features of each individual tank by
itself, the data of each tank by itself,
and the full sample. But it's optimized
through this sigma to give you better
predictions.
Um and you'll see that the tanks which
have unusually low survival that their
estimates are above.
Right? So it's not that it's shifted in
one direction. All the estimates are
shifted towards the mean relative to the
naive estimates from each tank. Can you
see that in the in the top part of the
plot? Um, this is much more obvious on
the left where there's less data and so
the there's more uncertainty and then
the partial pooling estimates are
further from the raw data. But on the
right where there's more evidence in
each tank, it's weighted differently and
now the estimates are much closer to the
naive proportions and that's as it
should be, right? There's more evidence
in those tanks. So the units with less
data, um, the partial pooling does more
work. Their their predictions come more
from the total population, right? All
right. So you can imagine a tank with
one tadpole. There's nothing
statistically wrong with that. Uh the
predictions for that tank would mainly
come from the average of tanks, right?
Not completely because whether the
tadpole lives or dies does influence
your your prediction. But then if you
add more tadpoles, you statistically
what the model does automatically is it
begins to increasingly ignore the
population and only focus on the tank
itself because you've got more
replicates. Does this make sense? Um, I
want to emphasize one of my favorite
this all arises automatically without
you having to think about it or be
clever. And this is my favorite thing
about basian inference is that you don't
have to be clever.
It's really great. Yeah, there's this
premium in technical fields on at least
appearing clever all the time. It's
terrible. It's absolutely terrible
because I think trying to be clever is a
way to sabotage yourself. Usually what
you want is a principled workflow
starting from clear assumptions and
axioms that you can logically apply.
That's the opposite of clever.
Yeah. And but that's that's what I want
to train. That is absolutely I think
what we want to do. And in this case,
what we've done is we've made a
generative model that expresses there's
a population and these nice optimal
statistical estimates arise naturally
from expressing that. You don't have to
anticipate them or plan for them or any
of that. You just have to follow the
generative workflow and that's one of
the reasons I love it. Um, okay. Oh, I I
made a zoom in so you could see. I'm
sorry. So now you can really see the red
points because they're bigger. All
right. When you watch this at at home
over again, you'll you'll know to
advance while I'm talking there. Um,
okay. So here's the punch line. This is
what I call automatic regularization.
Um, uh, where we want to go. Usually,
you don't want to do that cross
validation exercise, although you can.
Computers are fast now. I mean, if if
you can afford the computational time,
by all means, do a sensitivity analysis
across all the sigas. Um, find what to
set it at. There's nothing wrong with
doing that. People do it all the time in
machine learning. It's a total
production way to do industry level uh
models that are put into production in
industry. People fit them that way with
cross validation, right? It's totally
normal to do. But very often we want to
uh do it more quickly, use the sample
and train it on itself. And this is the
way multi-level models work. They do
automatic regularization.
We're going to learn sigma from the data
uh itself. And this means we just put
sigma into the model here and then we
give sigma a prior. Though the prior on
sigma does have an effect uh but it it
has a even weaker effect than the first
order ones. And I encourage you to
experiment with the with the prior on
sigma. I'll have an example in a later
lecture where we do some things with the
priors on um um these second level
parameters. Sometimes they're called
hyperparameters which is a terrible
term. Um and I prefer we called them
superparameters or something like that
at least sounds better. But uh they're
they're just parameters that get
embedded in the priors of other
parameters, right? So they're like
second order parameters. Um and there
there are certain kinds of models where
the inference is very sensitive to those
things. This this one's not. But there
are definitely going to be things like
Gaussian processes where we're going to
think harder about those hyperparameters
or superparameters.
Uh does this structure look okay? I
think I built you up to it so slowly
that you're impatient at this point,
which which is good. I'm doing my job
right. Um, I like to do prior
predictives uh quite often and I would
do it for the full model if this was a
project I was working on, but um I'm
just going to do it for uh the tank
level distribution now to to see so you
can see what the consequence is of
embedding priors in another prior. The
distribution of tanks, the alpha js
there are normal with a mean alpha bar
and a standard deviation sigma. But each
of those parameters is also uncertain.
Right. So in order to know what the
prior is for the alpha js, we need to
integrate over the uncertainty in both
of those other parameters. And so um I
have simulated this. This is the way I
do it in the book. Uh this this is all
normal. So you could just do the
integral, but I try not to do calculus
in this course. Uh it's unsemly to do
calculus in public I've been told. And
so I try to avoid it. No, I mean there
are going to be lots of models where you
can't do the integral and then you want
a method that works. So I teach you the
simulation approach because it always
works, right? It's just numerical
integration. So we do the numerical
integration here and we you see that
alpha j uh if you're not like me cursed
by doing statistics for decades, you you
probably think that looks normal like a
Gaussian. [clears throat] But to me it's
not right. The tails are too thick. That
is that is that is a t distribution of
some kind, right? A student t
distribution. It has thicker tails. And
this is what you get when you mix
Gaussian distributions with uncertain
means and standard deviations is you get
something that has thicker tails. Yeah,
that's that's what you're getting for
the population of tanks.
Okay, this is the code uh for fitting
this model. Um I think at this point if
you've had the first half of the course,
you're very familiar with Ulam code and
I don't have to go through this, but I
want you to see the correspondence
between the the mathematical notation on
the right and the code on the left. Um I
try to I wrote ulam so they're as
similar as possible. Yeah that's the
idea. Um this is not the partial pooling
model but this is the one where we just
fix no no this is the partial pooling
model. Sorry I got lost. Uh this is the
partial pooling model. We can just write
alpha bar and sigma in the prior for the
um a bracket t parameters. That's a
vector of intercepts one for each tank.
and then specify the priors for alpha
bar and sigma. When we run this, we get
a lot of parameter estimates. Yeah,
because there's an estimate for each
tank.
Now, we're not going to look at these in
detail. We'll plot the We've already
plotted these. You've already seen them
plotted. Um the things uh that you can
look at here. What we're going to focus
on is sigma. Uh sigma has a posterior
mean of 1.6.
um uh but it's it's high density region
is between like 1.3 and two just about
this is going to have a bigger impact on
your understanding if I plot it against
that cross validation plot from from pre
from before
again the horizontal here are different
values of sigma the v the standard
deviation across tanks and the vertical
is this cross validation score smaller
values are better and remember the best
values were around 1.7 seven. The
posterior dist distribution of sigma
straddles this, right? So the when we
learn sigma from the data itself, the
posterior distribution of it finds the
value that gives you the best cross
validation performance.
Now if you have even more data, you can
estimate sigma narrowly and that
posterior distribution will get narrow.
We only have 48 tanks, so there's
uncertainty, right? uh if you had 2,000
tanks, then you'd have a very narrow
posture distribution for sigma and you
could do better. Uh so the the fact that
it's wide is not bad. It's just obeys
the evidence we have, right? And that's
what's going on here. Yeah. Does this
make sense? I think this is cool. Yeah.
If I can nerd out on this for a second,
this is really cool that this happens
just as a consequence of using the
generative model of the system is that
we can find an estimate for the variance
in the population which gives us the
best predictions in expectation. It's
really cool, isn't it? It's cool. It's
very cool. Sorry, no matter how many
times I teach this, I'm just like, it's
so cool that that's true. Um, okay. Um,
I think I'm on time. This is incredible.
Okay. So, it's nice to uh compare models
when doing multi-level modeling. I'm
going to explain this slide to you, but
I I indulge me just for a minute. I
think I just need a minute to say
whenever we work on statistical
projects, we want to do some kind of
model comparison. I think even if it's a
randomized experiment and we know
exactly the designbased model we want to
fit, we want to engineer up to it
incrementally and compare the estimates
from the subm models just so we
understand the model better and so we
can find mistakes in the coding. Right?
So there's always some sort of ladder
climbing of model building in real
projects and that's absolutely true and
in the examples in this course I'm going
to skip that sometimes. And I apologize,
but I don't want to give you the
impression that in my own projects, I
just go straight to the destination
model. I never do that. I think it would
be I mean, you just learn too much by
incrementally building the model and
adding one feature at a time. For
multi-level analyses, this is even more
important because now you really want to
compare the the partial pooling model to
the no pooling model to better
understand how much pooling there has
been, right? You have to compare it to
the predictions from another model to
see what the effect is of that structure
and understand what has happened. Yes,
there's a question.
>> Yes. Uh is it always true that values of
sigma which are larger than the true
sigma less costly than values which are
lower from a cross validation
perspective?
>> Is that always true? I'm not prepared to
say yes or no. I want it to be true.
I will I will ask my colleague uh Aki
Veter who I think watches my lectures
[laughter] and he would know uh I'm not
prepared to say very few things are
always true so but that feels true to me
it yeah it has the right vibe it's a
good question I'll ask a uh when I meet
with him next yeah that's a good
question I'll come back to you on that
um okay
uh so in this case this is what we're
going to do I was just saying we want to
compare when we do multi-level modeling
we usually want to compare the no
pooling model sometimes called the fixed
effect model to the partial pooling
model not because we're going to choose
one or the other right we're in a
situation especially here where we we
expect the partial pooling model to be
better uh but we want to understand it
and how much partial pooling there has
been by comparing it to the fixed effect
model um so we're I'm going to do a
comparison here but I've already done
that comparison for you on the chart
between the fixed effect estimates the
the no pooling estimates and the partial
pooling estimates. I want to focus on
something else now. Um the top model is
the fixed effect model. Uh I want you to
see that um
um
no the top model is the partial pooling
model and the bottom model is is the is
the fixed model where I fixed sigma.
Right? So it's just fixed. Um,
and I want to do something else here is
is give you an understanding about what
the parameter count means and doesn't
mean in models like this because in
simple statistical models we often say I
mean sometimes I'll even say it even
though in general it's wrong. It's like
a white lie is that when you add more
parameters you overfit more, right? That
complex models tend to overfitit the
data. Um, but that's not in general
true. So this is why I hesitated on your
question Austo this is just like
what matters is the parameter structure
not the count and that's a complicated
thing when you say the structure so I
want to show you what happens in this
case we're just going to compare these
two models and we fit them to the data
and then we can do the cross validation
comparison I use WIC here but if you do
psis it's it's almost identical um
on the left there, the WIC score.
Remember, smaller values are better. The
partial pooling model, which is the MST,
is better. That's not surprising because
that's what the partial pooling does is
it gives you something that does better
in cross validation. That's what I just
showed you in the previous slides. The
second model, what I call the no MIM
model, is has a fixed sigma. So, it
doesn't do doesn't do the partial
pooling optimally. Um, it has one less
parameter. This is what I want to
emphasize here. it has one less
parameter.
Um uh and uh but now we look at the
other column I've highlighted PWIC.
Um this is sometimes called the
effective parameter count or model
complexity. Uh um and this is from the
over uh overfitting chapter in the book
and and from the first half of the
course. Um it's in very simple models
you'll just get the parameter count from
this. Like in a simple linear regression
with no hierarchical structure the PWAC
will literally be the number of
parameters. Yeah it's very good at this.
In these sorts of models it's never the
number of parameters. Uh because the
parameters are complicated and how many
parameters are there in these models?
Well you know there's at least 48
because there's one for each tank and
then there's a grand mean model and then
in one of them there's a sigma, right?
So there's 50 parameters in in MST and
49 in the other one. I think I may have
left out a parameter somewhere. Um but
the point is that the model that has
more parameters has a smaller effective
number of parameters. I'll say that
again. The model with more parameters
has a smaller effective number of
parameters. And that's because of the
hierarchical structure of these
parameters. adding sigma and then
fitting it to the data actually makes
the model overfit less which is why it
makes better predictions.
Yes, I'll say that again. Adding a
parameter can give you less overfitting
as soon as you have hierarchical
structure.
And I know this is like I'm really
belaboring this point, but I think it's
it's one of these things that
accidentally gets taught. It's not your
fault. It's my fault. But in the first
half of the course, it's easy to
conclude that more parameters is more
overfitting. But that's not in general
true. As soon as you start
hierarchically embedding parameters, the
opposite happens. And that's how neural
networks work. And all of this AI stuff
that's destroying science, right? All of
those models, they have billions of
parameters. And what they're what they
do is regularize. They massively
regularize. Yeah. Uh that's what they
do. uh those if I told you I had a
billion parameter model and you only had
the first half of my course, you think,
well, that thing overfits like crazy.
But it's the opposite actually. And that
those kinds of neural network
structures, adding parameters results in
less overfitting. Okay. Sorry, that was
a sermon and I'm out of time, but it's a
great place to stop. Okay. Um to
conclude, this has been the first
lecture on multi-level models. There
will be more. Oh yes, we have like 10
weeks of lectures on multi-level models
now. Um uh all I've talked about today
is number one here regularization and
number two has been in the background
more efficient estimates. It's a thing
that uh I haven't discussed but I'll
I'll highlight that at the start of the
next lecture. Um we'll have future
examples with different data sets where
we talk about estimation of variance
components and not just variance
components but correlations
correlational structure within the
population as well. something else you
can do in multi-level models and then at
some point I'll uh bring in some
confounding and we'll talk about how to
deal with confounding and observational
data sets with multi-level models as
well. Um thanks for your attention and
I'll see you next week.